

--- FROM https://morenaturalwine.com/blogs/natural-wine/the-best-places-to-drink-natural-wine-in-berlin ---

JaJa, Viniculture, Rocket Wine, Bar Sway, St Bart, MORE Natural Wine, Blanc de Fuck (a special natural wine bar by us which features 240+ bottles on the menu, 4 zero zero wines on tap for the first time in Berlin (including Patrick Bouju) and a vibe that is NOT like another small plates restaurant which is common for natural wine bars to evolve into).

The 5 best natural wine stores in Berlin, Germany are: Rocket Wine, Viniculture, 8greenbottles, Cantine Sant’Ambroeus, MORE Natural Wine. Viniculture in the west of Berlin, in the rather swanky Charlottenburg district which feels quite different to the more raw side of Kreuzberg and Neukölln offer a large range of wines from producers like Lapierre, Anders Frederik Steen, Franco Terpin and Wasenhaus. Expect cleaner, crisper wines from Viniculture which are still raw and vibrant, alongside some producers that veer more on the conventional side.

Cantine Sant’ Ambroeus, run solely by charming owner Marco Callegaro. His vast Italian wine knowledge combined with his small, yet homely Italian shop & bar is home to Cantina Giardino, Radikon, Lino Maga and more classics. The great selection of Italian wines should in our opinion be sipped accompanied by Marco’s wonderful Panino sandwiches. This place feels wonderfully Italian, like a rustic Enoteca you would find in Bologna or Milan.

Rocket Wine in central district Mitte has recently upgraded to a larger, newer location to become a bar as well as a shop - bridging the two in perfect harmony which we really admire. At Rocket Wine in Berlin Mitte you can enjoy a great range of European wines including Jean-Pierre Robinot, Costadilla, Milan Nesterec, and Koppitsch whilst nibbling on quality bread and cheese, as well as occasional more sophisticated food takeovers from local chefs.

Perhaps one of our personal favourite wine joints in Berlin, is the wonderful St Bart. Located in the Gräfekiez of Kreuzberg, this gastrobar originally inspired by casual London eatery St John offers simple bistro fare with a British influence, great outdoor seating and a bar feel inside too. Expect food to be served ideal for drinking with, such as Scotch Eggs, Oxtail Pies, Fish & Chips, Brick Chicken with Capers, Onglet Steak with Chummichurri or Bacon Sandwiches - all made in house with a lot of love. Whilst the original owner very recently sold St Bart on, at the time of writing the high standards and good vibes remain, and this is a strongly recommended place to eat and drink for all, with a decent wine list too by Front of House manager Danny. Watch a video of the place here and do not miss their British-style Sunday Roast for serious feasting…

Vegetarians in search of more upscale dining should head to Michelin starred restaurant Cookies Cream (hidden in perhaps the most Berlin-esque location ever!) where vibrant Sommelier Camille Darroux pairs wines excellently with their innovative plant-based dishes. There is also much praise around Sri Lanken vegetarian restaurant Sathutu too, which also features a big love for natural wine.

Lesser visited areas like Wedding, Schöneberg and Charlottenburg leave much to be desired in the way of natural wines, however, for those willing to travel a little outside of the usual districts there is certainly a buzz about new opening Julius in Wedding thanks to a rather impressive wine cellar owned by themselves and big sister hangout of Michelin-starred 8 seater ex-restaurant Ernst, which is now due to close in December 2024. Natural Wines found at Julius and nearby Cave Ernst include Tony Bornard, Lefort and many more harder-to-find bottles in Germany.

Mosto, whose owner Olaf Schindler imports a range of Georgian wines including Pheasant’s Tears as well as soulful Spanish natural wines like Escoda Sanahuja & Mendall. Pretty much next door is slightly larger bar The Rad and not too far away you’ll find Motif - which acts as a shop in the afternoon and a casual wine hangout at night with a range of affordable bottles and usually one of the better casual vibes to be expected. Owner Ossi has fused music and wine well in this spot, and it’s not unusual to find a pretty great atmosphere on warm summer nights.

JaJa in Neukölln is perhaps one of the most famous wine bars in the city and since it was sold by the original owners, it's fair to say most prefer the charming new team, who have upped the bar’s food game and somehow stocked the cellar with even more rare gems than before. Whilst JaJa has the hip factor, meaning they feel fully booked with travellers keen to get some cool Instagram kudos drinking natural wines by the glass, make no mistake - the wine list here is 100% excellent and wine nerds will be impressed. Expect to nudge shoulders with the city’s Somms later in the evening and if you’re in luck, some tasty bottles being shared amongst natural wine fanatics table to table, depending on guests that night of course.

Barra (advance booking essential) alongside nearby La Côte and there is now a much-welcomed more casual vibe of actual wine bars coming into play… Close to the lovely canal bursting with young Berliners in summer, is the bisto Sorrel, which for sure deserves its own visit for their well-sourced range of tasty bottles and scrumptious food for brunch and dinner, of which some claim has the best Schnitzel in Berlin... On our last visit we were thrilled to see bottles of Andreas Tscheppe on the list amongst other hits.

Another exciting recent addition to Berlin as a spot to go mainly for drinking (with food being secondary) is Bar Sway. Whilst many head to Bar Sway for the vibe was created by DJ owner Jamie Tiller (who sadly recently passed away) and the affordable wide choice of naturals by the glass, take note that some of the wines dotting the walls here really catch the eye, at very fair prices too. Great prices and some bangers are available, whilst nibbling on actual bar food - simple Saucisson with pistachios on the side, Grilled cheese in Brioche served with a pickle, Sardines on toast…and even casual packets of crisps! This is exactly the sort of wine bar Berlin was missing - and a must-visit for those not afraid of a loud vibe to enjoy on a night out.

Lager Lager not too far away may sound seemingly exclusive to beer, however, this is a decent neighbourhood bar to enjoy a small-medium, casual range natural wines at good prices too. And shout out to Le Balto too, who like Lager Lager and Bar Sway, are more drink focused than food - although take note their Jewish style bar snacks work a real treat with their mainly Eastern European wines, served from the bottle and tap.

The newest, and dare we say it as it's our own, most exciting addition to Neukölln is our own temporary bar called Blanc de Fuck, which will be in the city for 11 months from October 2024 before deciding next steps. Blanc de Fuck is different to most places because most Berlin natural wine bars without a substantial food offering focus on more simple wines. If you want nice Jura bangers or special bottles, you have to go to a winebar with a small plates restaurant focus. And that's great too! But sometimes... you want to go to a winebar that feels a bit more like a pub. One which does not come with a big food bill alongside the special wines... We have poured a LOT of love into this Blanc de Fuck and taken time to write description on ALL the wines on the menu... which features 240+ bottles! In addition to this, we have PATRICK BOUJU WINES ON TAP! There is only one other place we know in the world with this, which is in Paris! On tap, we also have an exclusive wine by Marto Wines called Blanc de Fuck, the inspiration for the winebar name, which you can also find by the bottle here. The extensive wine list includes gems we do not sell online or in our Berlin shop. We want them drunk here at the bar, to be enjoyed in the presence amongst other winelovers. Expect to find a solid Jura list that on opening includes producers like Jean-Francois Ganevat, Nicolas Jacob, Domaine des Cavarodes, Tournelle, Marnes Blances, Didier Grappe, Touraize, Valentin Morel (Les Pieds Sur Terre), L'Octavin, Tissot, Tony Bornard, Labet and many more as well as other in-demand producers from around Europe, and even Australia and the USA.

Over in neighbouring Kreuzberg, notable spots to visit include perhaps Berlin’s prettiest restaurant & winebar, ORA. This historic space used to be a wooden Apothecary, and is still adorned with the cupboards and shelving. Candlelit dinners amongst green leather seating and intimate side rooms make this a truly beautiful experience, and the wine list is similar to Michelberger, who also own it - refined wines with a sense of place. Seasonal produce is cooked well by the passionate team and service

--- FROM https://www.graperevival.com/berlin-natural-wine-bars/ ---

After taking the internet by storm, the dynamic duo behind morenaturalwine.com have opened a wine shop in Berlin. Owners Chris and Anika are now sharing their vast, and always interesting, selection of natural wines with the Neukölln community. 2024 update, they also have a dedicated natural wine bar, Blanc de Fuck, in Kreuzberg! Not only do they offer top wines from partner importers, they also personally bring in rare wines that can’t be found elsewhere in Germany. These range from Australian wines, to US cult favorites, UK sparklers, and of course gems from nearby Austria, France, Spain, and more. In addition to selling great wines, they also have unique wine artwork done by Anika herself. Check out some in our photos.  But really, you have to stop by to see her talent yourself.Ultimately, what makes MORE Natural Wine standout, is their passion and enthusiasm for these winemakers and the delicious wines they produce. Their research and knowledge is glowingly evident when you walk in the door or visit the online shop, they really know their stuff.Check them out in Berlin, or online, where they have recently launched a wine club as well. Follow them on Instagram for the latest news, events, and producer videos. They also launched a YouTube channel.MORE Natural Wine Flughafenstraße 22, 12053 Berlin, GermanyBlanc de Fuck Lenaustraße 10, 12047 Berlin, GermanyMORE Natural Wine Hours: Monday, Tuesday, Friday, and Saturday – 11am – 8pm.  Wednesday and Thursday – 2pm – 8pm.

--- FROM https://www.the-berliner.com/food/wine-bars-to-know/ ---

The Freundschaft (or friendship) in question is between Willi Schlögl, formerly of scenester hangout Cordobar, and Johannes Schellhorn, ex-sommelier at Nobelhart & Schmutzig. And this friendship is a productive one: visitors to the Mitte wine bar have a mind-boggling 600 bottles to choose from, mostly from Austria and France, selected for their quality and unique 'signature'. Many, but not all, are sustainable and/or biodynamic. Among the 10-15 open wines on offer, you'll always find one sparkling, one sweet, one rose and plentiful dry options. A small menu of Austrian-leaning bar bites will ensure you 'don't get too drunk too quickly', in the words of the two friends. Sit around the cosy bar or on the outdoor terrace, which in summer stays open till late into the evening.

Original founders Etienne Dodet and Julia Giese may have departed, but the wine at this white-tiled spot on Weichselstraße remains the same. Some 200 bottles showcasing tiny obscure vineyards and ancient, near-extinct grape varieties, mostly from France, all with as little intervention as possible. The menu, too, is still excellent, particularly the dishes made with fruit and veggies from local farmers or jaja's own garden plot in Gerswalde.

The clue is in the name. In a city where natural wine and sharing plates have become, well, the norm, Van Anh Le's dimly lit Prenzlauer Berg nook stands out for its lack of fancypants airs. The kitchen doesn't overdo it with luxury ingredients or fussy techniques – in fact, Normal's first signature dish was a simple plate of Dutch-style bitterballen, fried meat croquettes with mustard sauce. Head there now and you might start with homemade focaccia before moving on to stewed beans, zucchini carpaccio or a bowl of mussels, all washed down with an outrageously good selection of glasses and bottles.

When Liesl, a smoky Wohnzimmerkneipe with cheap beer and a vinyl soundtrack, closed its doors after over a decade in Neukölln, one of its regulars stepped in to take it over. This was no ordinary punter, though: Wolfgang Baumeister is an importer specialising in natural, biodynamic and orange wines from all over southeastern Europe. That's what you'll find at Liesl's new incarnation, along with snack boards full of local pickles and cheese, bread from neighbouring sourdough bakery Taktil, and even Slovenian sardines to match the Malvasia from the Slovenian Butul family.

A visit to Andreas Rink's Kreuzberg wine bar is always a surprise: every two to three weeks, he completely changes the wine list. What you can usually expect, though, is around 12 open wines, mainly from German regions like the Rheingau, the Mosel and the Palatinate. Rink doesn't follow any specific principles in his selection, but rather 'gives every winemaker a chance' to convince him. Have a glass or two with a hearty meat or cheese charcuterie plate, either indoors or out amidst the Kotti chaos on the terrace.

Elegant, open-minded and thirsty for discovery: this 40sqm space in Wedding might just be the most exciting wine bar in Berlin right now. It's definitely one of the best-looking, with neo-Brutalist rough plaster set against warm oak. Take a seat at the pint-sized bar and dive into the selection of 35(!) open wines, all of them natural – you're free to ask for a taste or two before you commit. Or go for the equally excellent range of champagne. To eat, there are freshly prepared tapas served by Portuguese owner Gonçalo de Sousa Monteiro, also of neighbouring cocktail bar Buck & Breck.

Ah, Paul-Linke-Ufer, the Côte d'Azur of Kreuzberg. Opened in 2019 where the Übersee café used to be, Frau Luna proved a perfect match for the canal-side street's swanky riviera vibe: great wines (from Charlottenburg supplier Viniculture), potent spritzes and beautifully presented spreads of light bites. The open-faced sandwiches, on Albatross sourdough, are especially worth ordering. Have a seat right on the canal or take shelter under the greenhouse-like roof.

This quintessential Berlin wine bar is tucked between Mauerpark and Schönhauser Allee. Nothing chichi about this place – just pure old-school Gemütlichkeit, where the wine, tap beer and whiskey flow freely amid a haze of cigarette smoke. There are just a handful of carefully selected European reds, whites and rosés offered by the glass each night, with bottles available on request; currently being showcased are Moulin Materels, a French Viogner with fresh, delicate fruity aromas.

Don't let the relaxed atmosphere fool you: at this pair of bars in Schöneberg and Kreuzberg, wine is very serious business. There's a long list of eloquently described Rieslings and Burgunder from the Weinverein's partner winery, Stallmann-Hiestand in Rhineland Palatinate, alongside a handful of offerings from other artisanal wineries in the region, all sold by the glass and reasonably priced. Good quality and transparency is the theme here, which also extends to the food, whether it's the hearty Landbrot topped with ham, salami or cheese from regional producers, or a vast selection of meaty and vegetarian Flammkuchen.

If you're looking to introduce friends or relatives to the world of German wine – and German food – look no further than Andreas Lochner's Schöneberg bar and restaurant. There are some 350 bottles to choose from, mostly from Germany and Austria, running the gamut from cheap house wine to high-class rarity. As for the food, it's 'German tapas', to be ordered individually or as a four- or five-course tasting menu, including dishes like cured salmon, braised ox cheek, Austrian Tafelspitz and, why not, currywurst.

Taken over by the Michelberger Hotel crew in mid-2020, the former apothecary on Oranienplatz oozes atmosphere. Its long wooden bar, festooned with old medicine bottles, now doles out medication of another kind: natural wines from across Europe and South Africa, with some truly exciting discoveries to be had for €30-€40 a bottle. You can get a pretty great three-course meal from chef Sam Kindillon, but we won't blame you for sticking to the bar snacks, like a lovely plate of thin-sliced melon and prosciutto with chilli salt, Fish Klub oysters or toast topped with Roddie Sloan razor clams.

--- FROM https://drops.wine/en-dk/blogs/wein-wissen/natural-wines-in-berlin-the-top-addresses-in-the-capital-city ---

Bar Normal: Berlin's new natural wine hotspot. The chic corner bistro on Oderberger Straße and Kastanienallee offers a fine selection of modern, French-inspired dishes as well as a wide-ranging natural wine list. From Ganevat to Sylvain Pataille or Mark Angeli and Lichtenberger González, sommelier Alex Kanastab demonstrates a stylistically confident hand in the design of the wine list. The Bar Normal pours natural wines from France, Austria, Italy and Georgia - all natural and sustainably produced, of course.

Natural wine with neighborhood flair at Konträr. Located in the quiet Winskiez district, the bar with a neighbourhood flair has been serving natural wines since 2021 and has since made a name for itself among connoisseurs and gourmets. The wine list offers a colorful spectrum of white, orange and red wines from Austria, Germany, Spain and France. If you're lucky, your host Taran will give you a personalized recommendation for your next bottle. These are best enjoyed with the homemade and probably best tapas in the district, which are served at Konträr alongside natural wine.

Rekorder: Seafood and natural wine in Bergmannkiez. Located in the popular Bergmannkiez district of Kreuzberg, the bar offers natural wine for beginners and long-time fans alike. Refreshing Pet Nat, funky Riesling or silky Blaufränkisch are served in the Rekorder in a harmonious ambience. Young photographic artists from the city are regularly presented on the stucco ceiling of the bar, and their work is best discussed over a few glasses of natural wine.

Pure indulgence at Estelle. Brunch, after-work drink or dinner? Estelle serves natural wine at any time of day or meal. Because the restaurant on Kopenhagenerstraße in Prenzlauer Berg only serves the best on the plate and in the glass, you'll find one or two vinophile surprises on the menu. Whether juicy, funky or classic, with French toast, pizza or seasonal delicacies - Estelle is the place for connoisseurs.

Sustainability in perfection at Otto. The restaurant in Oderberger Straße is a pioneer in sustainability and offers a fine selection of modern German dishes as well as a wide-ranging natural wine list. Otto pours regional wines mixed with wines from France or Austria - all naturally and sustainably produced, of course. The selected natural wines can be enjoyed in a rustic atmosphere for lunch or an extended dinner.

Sofi The Bakery: Neighborhood bakery with natural wine in Mitte. At Sofi, Danish star restaurateur Frederik Bille Brahe combines these two goods to the highest quality and offers not only crusty sourdough bread and sweet or savory pastries, but also a select range of natural wines. Sofi knows that bread and wine work well together and serves natural wines from red to white and from orange to sparkling in the atmospheric Sophie-Gips-Höfe in Berlin Mitte.

Le Balto: Natural wine and minimalist chic. Le Balto doesn't want to be just another wine bar in Berlin and manages this skillfully with a minimalist atmosphere, tapas and the heart of the bar: the well-stocked natural wine shelf. As the little sister of Shakespear&Son and Fine Bagels, Le Balto offers selected natural wines from Austria, France and the Czech Republic from the tap and, of course, from the bottle.

jaja:Natural wine oasis in Neukölln. In the middle of the hustle and bustle of Neukölln, jaja on Weichselstraße is a natural wine oasis. The wine bistro has made it its vision to serve only ethically sourced products. The range at jaja includes a total of 200 different natural wines, mainly from France, and sourced from winegrowers who follow the same philosophy as jaja - namely to treat nature with full respect.

Friendship:Wine as your best friend. Since opening its doors in Berlin Mitte between Friedrichstrasse station and the university library in 2017, the bar has seen itself as the best friend of wine fans - from classic to natural wines. All the treasures of the spectrum, from fresh pet nats to elegant champagnes, intense whites and earthy reds, are served across the 26-metre-long bar. Johannes and Willi's portfolio is carefully curated, and because best friends are careful not to look too deeply into the glass, Freundschaft also serves a fine selection of bar food.

Drinks and dinner with pharmacy flair at Ora. Located in the former Oranien-Apotheke pharmacy in the heart of Kreuzberg, Ora impresses on three levels: charming ambience, exquisite food and a large selection of natural wines. The constantly growing wine list includes quality wines from great vineyards as well as experimental wines from lesser-known regions.

Natural wine and tapas deluxe at Bar Sway. Since October 2022, Bar Sway on Pannierstraße in Neukölln has been the place to meet for natural wine, tapas and house music in a relaxed living room atmosphere with its own DIY sound system from H.A.N.D.HiFi. The natural wines are tasted and curated by bar owner and DJ Jamie Tiller. The Sway bar serves classics from Patrick Bouju and Gut Oggau, as well as exciting newcomers to natural wine - from Germany to Greece.

Michelberger: dining and drinking natural wine as an experience. In the middle of Warschauerstraße, the Michelberger restaurant is an oasis in the hustle and bustle: regional ingredients processed into innovative dishes are accompanied by low-intervention and natural wines. The Michelberger concept is based on organic, biodynamic and sustainable products, which are sourced from the restaurant's own farm in the Spreewald and creatively processed.

Natural wine deluxe at Café Frieda. Café Frieda in Helmholtzkiez opened its doors in 2021 as the little sister of Mrs. Robinson and has been a firm favorite for exciting natural wines ever since. Frieda focuses on biodynamic and low-intervention wines from near - such as Germany, Austria, France - and far - from Georgia or Portugal. Natural wine is always served by the glass at Frieda, whether for brunch with a hand-rolled croissant, a little later with an aperitif and homemade sourdough bread on the terrace, and even more so for dinner in an elegant evening atmosphere with dry-aged duck or Seabrass Crudo.

Wine Damager: natural wines with rapper Tony D. A stone's throw from Rosenthaler Platz, this place serves really good natural wine. Behind the counter: Tony D, former rapper and co-founder of Aggro Berlin. In addition to beats and rap music, Tony is also a fan of natural wine, which he sells in his store in Berlin Mitte. His carefully chosen selection includes small natural wine producers as well as evergreens of biodynamic viticulture from Germany through to great classics from Bordeaux and Burgundy.

Natural wines and Woodfire Quisine in the ITA Bistro. The ITA Bistro on Lettestraße in Prenzlberg's Helmholtz Kiez is a new woodfire kitchen concept. The food is cooked exclusively in a stone oven, in which seasonal products are conjured up into modern dishes. The carefully curated range of natural wines at ITA is still small but fine. From rare and selected drops of different natural wines, mainly from France and Italy, the ITA Bistro pours a modern natural wine style into the glass and delights with smoky snacks, homemade bread and crispy salads.

Rare natural wines at Ernst. Ernst is located in the heart of the vibrant metropolis of Berlin in the Wedding district and is now known far beyond the city limits. Seasonal, Japanese-inspired fusion cuisine is celebrated here. Guests can look forward to 30 to 40 courses of freestyle plates created from the highest quality regional ingredients. The creativity also extends to the wine selection: Since summer 2023, Nacho Diaz, the sommelier in charge at Ernst, has demonstrated a stylish knack for selecting natural wines. The wine list offers an intellectual selection of top wines, from new-school vintners to rare natural wines.

--- FROM https://www.newdaytoexplore.com/post/natural-wine-bars-in-berlin ---

JAJA is a cozy spot that has quickly become a favorite among natural wine enthusiasts. The bar is known for its extensive selection of natural wines from small producers across Europe. The wines by the glass are fantastic, as is the service. JAJA also offers a delightful menu of seasonal dishes that pair beautifully with their wine offerings. If you're hungry and thirsty, be prepared for a higher bill. As the JAJA wine bar in Berlin Neukölln is very popular and only has a few seats, you can't get in without a reservation.

ORA in Berlin Kreuzberg is the place to be. The beautiful bar on Oranienplatz offers an outstanding interior with wooden decorations from 1860, where time seems to have stood still, and a great terrace. In addition to fantastic natural wine, there are various top-class bar snacks, oysters, and seasonally changing dishes. The wine list is regularly evolving, ranging from esoteric wines from lesser-known regions and winemakers to highly sought-after fine wines. The knowledgeable staff is passionate about natural wines and eager to guide you through their offerings, making each visit an educational journey.

Viniculture in Berlin Charlottenburg's name says it all: everything revolves around good wine and natural wine. This special wine shop has been around since 1864. What we particularly like about Viniculture - apart from remarkable pet nat and sparkling wines - is that the company organizes various events and wine tastings for wine lovers and presents interesting wine producers of the month, sommeliers, and winemakers every month. Viniculture has the most extensive range of natural wines in Berlin. So there is guaranteed to be something for you. Incidentally, Viniculture delivers its natural wines to all EU countries. The wine shop also offers a wide selection of alcoholic wines. It's worth trying!

SWAY is located in Berlin's Pannierstraße – it's a delight for all the senses. Here, the excellent natural wines taste best paired with fresh dishes such as peach caprese, house made linguine tossed in a verdant basil pesto, fresh pappardelle with a veg ragu and sticky date pudding. Mmmh! By the way, you can order the wines by the glass, bottle or even to take away. The Sway Bar only offers natural wines that have been produced organically without additives. The record player provides cozy vibes with good music. The Sway Bar also organizes regular pop-up events such as “Record X Sway” and various collaborations with Berlin restaurants. Perfect for a fun evening with friends.

Sorrel – a restaurant that is very popular among lovers of natural wine. Sorrel describes its natural wines as follows: “What we get are wines with character and vibrancy, wines that have life.” Sorrel's thoughtfully curated menu features seasonal dishes that blend international flavors with local ingredients. What better accompaniment than a chilled glass of natural wine? Two glasses of chilled natural wine. The Sorrel not only offers you fantastic natural wine, but is also perfect for your next Sunday brunch.

Rekorder in Berlin Kreuzberg. In the beautiful Bergmannkiez district, you can sample the fine selection of natural wines on the terrace or in the indoor area with six-metre-high ceilings. By the way, they also serve you alcohol-free pet nat here! In addition to fantastic wines, great coffee, and French food, there are changing exhibitions here, as the Recorder is also a gallery. Good products are just as crucial in the Rekorder as coherent design and sustainability. The owners have put a lot of heart and soul into their bar and made many things themselves, such as the ceramic tableware and the tables. For us, it's a must for anyone who wants to try out new natural wines in a great atmosphere.

Valla Vino has been a place for sustainable natural wine enjoyment in the capital. If you want to explore the world of natural wines in Berlin, you can't go past Vallo Vino. There are around 25 open wines of all colors on tap and over 200 wines on the shelves (the cheapest wine already starts at € 9.90). Vallo Vino specializes in orange wines and offers a unique tasting experience beyond traditional wine categories. With their deep understanding of the wines, the friendly staff are always ready to guide you through the diverse selection. The wine bar enriches Prenzlauer Berg with regular kitchen takeovers and trendy pop-ups in the Berlin gastro scene. Incidentally, you can order a large selection of natural wines and non-alcoholic alternatives directly to your home via the webshop.

Motif Wein in Berlin's Neukölln district is a creative wine space that has become a hotspot for natural wine lovers. Located at Weserstraße 189, Motif Wein offers a unique blend of natural wines, music and cultural events. The extensive selection of natural wines includes organic, biodynamic and minimally invasive varieties, carefully selected to offer a diverse and high-quality tasting experience. A wine tasting voucher (6 wines, cheese and olives) costs €35 and is a wonderful date idea. Our verdict: Motiv Wein is the ideal place to browse LPs over a good glass of natural wine and discover the weekly concert program. Every Friday and Saturday from 6 - 9 pm, Motif Wein broadcasts live from the store window with some of their favorite DJs.

--- FROM https://punchdrink.com/articles/the-best-places-to-drink-wine-in-berlin/ ---

Located just a short walk from Berlin's über-hip Torstraße and the Hackescher Markt, Cordobar is the wine bar on everyone's lips. The bar, which is named for the 1978 World Cup final dubbed the 'Miracle of Cordoba'—miracle because it saw the Austrian football team beat the Germans for the first time in 47 years—is also a cheeky reference to the bar's half-German, half-Austrian ownership. Young chef Lukas Mraz rules the kitchen with dishes that are surprising for their precision, while Willi Schlögl and Gerhard Retter run an exceptional list of primarily Austrian and German wines (again, hence the name) with great charm.

Briefmarken Weine, a former shop selling collectible stamps (really), is home to what is very likely the best pasta available north of the Alps. Served up in a very typical airy, brick-lined room, the bar's daily-rotating pasta dishes are served up alongside an amazing range of exclusively Italian wines. If you're interested in exploring Italy, from the classics to the farther-flung leaders of the country's natural wine movement, at low prices, this is the place.

In 2007 Jürgen Hammer & Manuela (Manu) Sporbert opened what was supposed to be a wine store and sandwich shop. But nobody knows wine—and how to talk about it—better than Jürgen, so the shop quickly and unintentionally morphed into a bar. Their one-of-a-kind wine list is not only the best around, but is just as handcrafted and tasty as one of Manu's incredible, homemade sandwiches.

There are local joints, and then there's Kurpfalz-Weinstuben. Wooden signs on the walls, classic Römer glassware, crocheted tablecloths and a small summer terrace—Herr Schulz's restaurant embodies what a jumping Berlin joint might have looked like in the 1920s or '30s. Also: you won't find better pork belly and roulade anywhere in the city.

The phenomenon that began in Paris and then hopped the pond to New York, Tokyo and Copenhagen has finally arrived in Berlin: natural wine. Maxim's, which opened in 2014, has quickly assumed the role of leader of the naturalist charge, offering a tightly curated selection of wines from France, Germany, Spain and Austria, along with a fantastic selection of raw milk cheeses and artisanal sausages.

'Kotti,' as Berlin's gritty Kottbuser Tor district is known, is a great place to pick up a dime bag, if that's your thing. Or just a short walk away, right next to the legendary Würgelengel bar, you'll find one of the coziest wine bars in all of Berlin. Andreas Rink isn't from Berlin originally, but has somehow managed to convince Kreuzberg's notoriously alternative crowd to lay off the cheap beer and give a decent wine a chance. He also maintains a low-key selection of mostly cold starter plates.

Rutz's high-low approach has made it a sort of every-occasion wine destination. The refined dishes of Michelin-star chef Marco Müller grace the tables at the restaurant upstairs, while in the wine bar on the first floor you'll find simpler fare like stew and ribs (the best in the city). The wine list hits tables on both floors and features almost 900 bottles, 400 of which are dedicated to riesling. So if the grape and its wines still conjure bad memories of candy-sweet Liebfraumilch and Blue Nun, this is the place to update your perspective.

The wine list at Weinschenke Weinstein is one of the city's most value-driven, with rieslings going back to the mid '90s, all priced under 100 euro. And while wine is a huge draw here, the restaurant continues to establish itself as one of the best in Prenzlauer Berg. The bar also features a fantastic selection of sausage and cheese produced in and around Berlin, Mangalitsa ham and the spiciest horseradish the city has to offer.

--- FROM https://morenaturalwine.com/blogs/natural-wine/the-best-places-to-drink-natural-wine-in-berlin?srsltid=AfmBOorqJniKcfIjNJdddrs-rAZGqDl9kEPD5gQ77zMBebjo9n2mprtQ ---

JaJa, Viniculture, Rocket Wine, Bar Sway, St Bart, MORE Natural Wine, Blanc de Fuck (a special natural wine bar by us which features 240+ bottles on the menu, 4 zero zero wines on tap for the first time in Berlin (including Patrick Bouju) and a vibe that is NOT like another small plates restaurant which is common for natural wine bars to evolve into).

The 5 best natural wine stores in Berlin, Germany are: Rocket Wine, Viniculture, 8greenbottles, Cantine Sant’Ambroeus, MORE Natural Wine.

Viniculture in the west of Berlin, in the rather swanky Charlottenburg district which feels quite different to the more raw side of Kreuzberg and Neukölln offer a large range of wines from producers like Lapierre, Anders Frederik Steen, Franco Terpin and Wasenhaus. Expect cleaner, crisper wines from Viniculture which are still raw and vibrant, alongside some producers that veer more on the conventional side.

Cantine Sant’ Ambroeus, run solely by charming owner Marco Callegaro. His vast Italian wine knowledge combined with his small, yet homely Italian shop & bar is home to Cantina Giardino, Radikon, Lino Maga and more classics. The great selection of Italian wines should in our opinion be sipped accompanied by Marco’s wonderful Panino sandwiches. This place feels wonderfully Italian, like a rustic Enoteca you would find in Bologna or Milan.

Rocket Wine in Berlin Mitte you can enjoy a great range of European wines including Jean-Pierre Robinot, Costadilla, Milan Nesterec, and Koppitsch whilst nibbling on quality bread and cheese, as well as occasional more sophisticated food takeovers from local chefs.

Perhaps one of our personal favourite wine joints in Berlin, is the wonderful St Bart. Located in the Gräfekiez of Kreuzberg, this gastrobar originally inspired by casual London eatery St John offers simple bistro fare with a British influence, great outdoor seating and a bar feel inside too. Expect food to be served ideal for drinking with, such as Scotch Eggs, Oxtail Pies, Fish & Chips, Brick Chicken with Capers, Onglet Steak with Chummichurri or Bacon Sandwiches - all made in house with a lot of love.

Vegetarians in search of more upscale dining should head to Michelin starred restaurant Cookies Cream (hidden in perhaps the most Berlin-esque location ever!) where vibrant Sommelier Camille Darroux pairs wines excellently with their innovative plant-based dishes. There is also much praise around Sri Lanken vegetarian restaurant Sathutu too, which also features a big love for natural wine.

For those willing to travel a little outside of the usual districts there is certainly a buzz about new opening Julius in Wedding thanks to a rather impressive wine cellar owned by themselves and big sister hangout of Michelin-starred 8 seater ex-restaurant Ernst, which is now due to close in December 2024. Natural Wines found at Julius and nearby Cave Ernst include Tony Bornard, Lefort and many more harder-to-find bottles in Germany.

JaJa in Neukölln is perhaps one of the most famous wine bars in the city and since it was sold by the original owners, it's fair to say most prefer the charming new team, who have upped the bar’s food game and somehow stocked the cellar with even more rare gems than before. Whilst JaJa has the hip factor, meaning they feel fully booked with travellers keen to get some cool Instagram kudos drinking natural wines by the glass, make no mistake - the wine list here is 100% excellent and wine nerds will be impressed.

Bar Sway was created by DJ owner Jamie Tiller (who sadly recently passed away) and the affordable wide choice of naturals by the glass, take note that some of the wines dotting the walls here really catch the eye, at very fair prices too. Great prices and some bangers are available, whilst nibbling on actual bar food - simple Saucisson with pistachios on the side, Grilled cheese in Brioche served with a pickle, Sardines on toast…and even casual packets of crisps! This is exactly the sort of wine bar Berlin was missing - and a must-visit for those not afraid of a loud vibe to enjoy on a night out.

Blanc de Fuck is different to most places because most Berlin natural wine bars without a substantial food offering focus on more simple wines. If you want nice Jura bangers or special bottles, you have to go to a winebar with a small plates restaurant focus. And that's great too! But sometimes... you want to go to a winebar that feels a bit more like a pub. One which does not come with a big food bill alongside the special wines... We have poured a LOT of love into this Blanc de Fuck and taken time to write description on ALL the wines on the menu... which features 240+ bottles! In addition to this, we have PATRICK BOUJU WINES ON TAP! There is only one other place we know in the world with this, which is in Paris!

Over in neighbouring Kreuzberg, notable spots to visit include perhaps Berlin’s prettiest restaurant & winebar, ORA. This historic space used to be a wooden Apothecary, and is still adorned with the cupboards and shelving. Candlelit dinners amongst green leather seating and intimate side rooms make this a truly beautiful experience, and the wine list is similar to Michelberger, who also own it - refined wines with a sense of place. Seasonal produce is cooked well by the passionate team and service.

--- FROM https://www.8greenbottles.de/en/naturwein-in-berlin-diese-8-orte-musst-du-kennen/?srsltid=AfmBOopYHCtJ11B0ZMib_NnUhu9AnvSPVb5xp0kqgW-GEA_cHK5FDFkf ---

1. 8greenbottles Shops
Come visit us in our two stores in Kreuzberg and in Prenzlauer Berg. Here you will find our entire selection of natural wines. We are always looking forward to relaxed wine talks, good vibes, and happy customers (without any pretentious talk, pinky promise!) PS: Tastings are of course also available!
8gb. Kreuzberg: Böckhstraße 12, 10967 Berlin
8gb. Prenzlauer Berg: Senefelderstraße 34, 10437 Berlin
OPENING HOURS
DI-FR: 3-8 p.m.
SA: 12-20 o'clock

2. Motif wine
At Motif on Weserstraße in Neukölln, you can find a great combo of cozy atmosphere, good vinyl beats and a great selection of natural wines. You can drink the wines right there and enjoy the music or take a bottle of natural wine home with you. Very relaxed and low-key!
Weserstr. 189, 12045 Berlin
OPENING HOURS
DI-SA: 16-22 o'clock

3. St. Bart Pub
St. Bart Pub combines everything that a natural wine spot in Berlin should be: really good food, a great wine list and fantastic service. Stop by if you're looking for a nice evening with friends or on Sundays for a real British Sunday Roast!
Graefestraße 71, 10967 Berlin
OPENING HOURS
DO-SA & MO: 18-23:30
SO: 16-23:30

4. Otto
A must-visit place for natural wines and good food in Berlin. In the heart of Prenzlauer Berg you will find a very unique, regional, and seasonal menu at Otto. Of course, the wine list is an absolute dream for all natural wine lovers. What more could you want?
Oderberger Str. 56, 10435 Berlin
OPENING HOURS
DO-MO: 18-23 o'clock

5. Sway
Bar Sway in Neukölln really screams for a relaxed glass of wine. Here you'll only find natural wines that are completely free of sulfur and other additives (keyword: zero zero). Absolute heaven for all fans of natty enjoyment. Oh yeah, there's also really good music there!
Pannierstraße 29, 12047 Berlin
OPENING HOURS
Wed-Thu: 5-24 p.m.
FR-SA: 5pm-01am

6. Sathutu
Have you ever had Singhalese food? Sathutu in Winsviertel takes you to a whole new world of taste. The dishes originate from Sri Lanka and hardly anything goes better with the many spices and the flavours than a glass of orange wine. A must-try for all foodies!
Rykestraße 15, 10405 Berlin
OPENING HOURS
Wed-Sun: 6pm-2pm

7. Barra
Barra in the heart of Neukölln is a star on Berlin's natural wine map. For us, it's the perfect place to celebrate, treat yourself to a special evening, and feel like you're in 7th foodie heaven. In a minimalist atmosphere, you can enjoy sharing dishes with the best wine pairing.
Okerstraße 2, 12049 Berlin
OPENING HOURS
Wed-Fri: 18-21:45

8. MORE Natural Wine
The MORE Natural Wine Store in Berlin is THE spot to browse through wines from different wine regions and make your choice amongst an incredible variety of natural wines. For a long time, MORE Natural Wine was only an online store, but since November 2022 you can get face-to-face advice in the physical store in Neukölln.
Flughafenstraße 22, 12053 Berlin
OPENING HOURS
MO, DI & FR: 11-20 h
MI & DO: 2-8 p.m.
SA: 11:30-20 h

--- FROM https://thecolumbist.com/best-wine-bars-in-berlin-2024/ ---

Rocket: sustainable wines and memorable gatheringsWalking down Sophienstraße, you will pass by a little sign of a wine bottle shooting into space. At first sight, Rocket looks like a cozy yet ordinary wine shop. But behind the counter is an almost hidden, long wooden table for guests to share a glass or two.The values of Rocket rely on a sustainable and transparent experience. For them, wine should be like it used to be, not filled with chemicals, sterilizers or colorants. Their natural wines are of the best quality since the bar has strong ties, sometimes even friendships, with its producers. Rocket offers a wine gathering called Wine Rush to bring the vintners closer to their guests, inviting them to showcase their latest vintages.A small food menu includes cheese platters and homemade snacks. Each product can be associated with the producer's name; often, there’s even a story to tell. The wines are from all across Europe, focusing mainly on French wines. The bottles change weekly and are adapted to demand and seasonality. Rocket promises to find the right wine for everyone.The manifest of sincere products is appealing and makes the visit even more exciting. Keep in mind that their main focus is the wine shop, and closing time is around 9 pm. The bar offers a special Xmas box option filled with their best products, perfect for a Christmas present. Orders are available until the December 10.Sophienstraße 10, 10178 Berlin, Deutschland Bar Schwips: Tea or wine?Wei-En-Chan and Jonas combine their shared passion and open together a tiny bar at the Romantikerkiez in Berlin Mitte. Bar Schwips combines a variety of tea and wine on their menu, a concept out of the ordinary. It invites customers to a warm evening, leaving them, as the name says, Schwips (eng. tipsy) with alcoholic or non-alcoholic beverages. A collective project that promises high-end service, quality products and a cozy atmosphere.The drinks are accompanied by a selected food menu, including bar snacks but also hearty goulash or pickled vegetables. It truly whets your appetite just by looking at the menu.Their wine card is playfully sectioned into three categories. The first category contains joyful wines, yet light and easy to drink. The second category is dedicated to crazy and more natural bottles. The third one showcases mature and complex wines with depth and age. A wide range of varieties can be expected, with 80 bottle positions and ten open wines that change frequently. So, tea or wine?Eichendorffstraße 1, 10115 Berlin, Deutschland Salvatore Pulvermacher: rustic charm and fine Italian winesSalvatore Pulvermacher is not strictly a wine bar but has the same characteristics. Rustic interior with a warm atmosphere. Giovanni, the owner, calls it a high-end pub. After a long career in gastronomy, he opened Salvatore Pulvermacher, named after his father. The goal was to create an easy-going bar with good quality products at a fair price.The menu offers fine Italian wines alongside traditional German beer on tap. The bar is full of regulars and well-visited, especially on weekends, so don’t be deceived by its quiet side street near Mauernpark. Fun fact: there is a bowl filled with fruits in the corner that is offered to guests for free.Cantianstraße 21, 10437 Berlin, Deutschland Berlin's wine scene offers something special for everyone, from natural wine enthusiasts to casual sippers seeking cozy spots. Whether you're in Kreuzberg, Neukölln, or Mitte, these wine bars invite you to explore unique flavors, connect with passionate vintners, and enjoy unforgettable evenings.Ready to find your favorite? Start your journey with our recommendations of the best wine bars in Berlin and discover the perfect place to raise a glass.

--- FROM https://www.graperevival.com/berlin-natural-wine-bars/ ---

After taking the internet by storm, the dynamic duo behind morenaturalwine.com have opened a wine shop in Berlin. Owners Chris and Anika are now sharing their vast, and always interesting, selection of natural wines with the Neukölln community. 2024 update, they also have a dedicated natural wine bar, Blanc de Fuck, in Kreuzberg! Not only do they offer top wines from partner importers, they also personally bring in rare wines that can’t be found elsewhere in Germany. These range from Australian wines, to US cult favorites, UK sparklers, and of course gems from nearby Austria, France, Spain, and more. In addition to selling great wines, they also have unique wine artwork done by Anika herself. Check out some in our photos.  But really, you have to stop by to see her talent yourself.Ultimately, what makes MORE Natural Wine standout, is their passion and enthusiasm for these winemakers and the delicious wines they produce. Their research and knowledge is glowingly evident when you walk in the door or visit the online shop, they really know their stuff.Check them out in Berlin, or online, where they have recently launched a wine club as well. Follow them on Instagram for the latest news, events, and producer videos. They also launched a YouTube channel.MORE Natural Wine Flughafenstraße 22, 12053 Berlin, GermanyBlanc de Fuck Lenaustraße 10, 12047 Berlin, GermanyMORE Natural Wine Hours: Monday, Tuesday, Friday, and Saturday – 11am – 8pm.  Wednesday and Thursday – 2pm – 8pm.

--- FROM https://drops.wine/en-dk/blogs/wein-wissen/natural-wines-in-berlin-the-top-addresses-in-the-capital-city ---

Bar Normal: Berlin's new natural wine hotspot. The chic corner bistro on Oderberger Straße and Kastanienallee offers a fine selection of modern, French-inspired dishes as well as a wide-ranging natural wine list. From Ganevat to Sylvain Pataille or Mark Angeli and Lichtenberger González, sommelier Alex Kanastab demonstrates a stylistically confident hand in the design of the wine list. The Bar Normal pours natural wines from France, Austria, Italy and Georgia - all natural and sustainably produced, of course.

Natural wine with neighborhood flair at Konträr. Located in the quiet Winskiez district, the bar with a neighbourhood flair has been serving natural wines since 2021 and has since made a name for itself among connoisseurs and gourmets. The wine list offers a colorful spectrum of white, orange and red wines from Austria, Germany, Spain and France. If you're lucky, your host Taran will give you a personalized recommendation for your next bottle. These are best enjoyed with the homemade and probably best tapas in the district, which are served at Konträr alongside natural wine.

Rekorder: Seafood and natural wine in Bergmannkiez. Located in the popular Bergmannkiez district of Kreuzberg, the bar offers natural wine for beginners and long-time fans alike. Refreshing Pet Nat, funky Riesling or silky Blaufränkisch are served in the Rekorder in a harmonious ambience. Young photographic artists from the city are regularly presented on the stucco ceiling of the bar, and their work is best discussed over a few glasses of natural wine.

Pure indulgence at Estelle. Brunch, after-work drink or dinner? Estelle serves natural wine at any time of day or meal. Because the restaurant on Kopenhagenerstraße in Prenzlauer Berg only serves the best on the plate and in the glass, you'll find one or two vinophile surprises on the menu. Whether juicy, funky or classic, with French toast, pizza or seasonal delicacies - Estelle is the place for connoisseurs.

Sustainability in perfection at Otto. The restaurant in Oderberger Straße is a pioneer in sustainability and offers a fine selection of modern German dishes as well as a wide-ranging natural wine list. Otto pours regional wines mixed with wines from France or Austria - all naturally and sustainably produced, of course. The selected natural wines can be enjoyed in a rustic atmosphere for lunch or an extended dinner.

Sofi The Bakery: Neighborhood bakery with natural wine in Mitte. At Sofi, Danish star restaurateur Frederik Bille Brahe combines these two goods to the highest quality and offers not only crusty sourdough bread and sweet or savory pastries, but also a select range of natural wines. Sofi knows that bread and wine work well together and serves natural wines from red to white and from orange to sparkling in the atmospheric Sophie-Gips-Höfe in Berlin Mitte.

Le Balto: Natural wine and minimalist chic. Le Balto doesn't want to be just another wine bar in Berlin and manages this skillfully with a minimalist atmosphere, tapas and the heart of the bar: the well-stocked natural wine shelf. As the little sister of Shakespear&Son and Fine Bagels, Le Balto offers selected natural wines from Austria, France and the Czech Republic from the tap and, of course, from the bottle.

jaja:Natural wine oasis in Neukölln. In the middle of the hustle and bustle of Neukölln, jaja on Weichselstraße is a natural wine oasis. The wine bistro has made it its vision to serve only ethically sourced products. The range at jaja includes a total of 200 different natural wines, mainly from France, and sourced from winegrowers who follow the same philosophy as jaja - namely to treat nature with full respect.

Friendship:Wine as your best friend. Since opening its doors in Berlin Mitte between Friedrichstrasse station and the university library in 2017, the bar has seen itself as the best friend of wine fans - from classic to natural wines. All the treasures of the spectrum, from fresh pet nats to elegant champagnes, intense whites and earthy reds, are served across the 26-metre-long bar. Johannes and Willi's portfolio is carefully curated, and because best friends are careful not to look too deeply into the glass, Freundschaft also serves a fine selection of bar food.

Drinks and dinner with pharmacy flair at Ora. Located in the former Oranien-Apotheke pharmacy in the heart of Kreuzberg, Ora impresses on three levels: charming ambience, exquisite food and a large selection of natural wines. The constantly growing wine list includes quality wines from great vineyards as well as experimental wines from lesser-known regions.

Natural wine and tapas deluxe at Bar Sway. Since October 2022, Bar Sway on Pannierstraße in Neukölln has been the place to meet for natural wine, tapas and house music in a relaxed living room atmosphere with its own DIY sound system from H.A.N.D.HiFi. The natural wines are tasted and curated by bar owner and DJ Jamie Tiller. The Sway bar serves classics from Patrick Bouju and Gut Oggau, as well as exciting newcomers to natural wine - from Germany to Greece.

Michelberger: dining and drinking natural wine as an experience. In the middle of Warschauerstraße, the Michelberger restaurant is an oasis in the hustle and bustle: regional ingredients processed into innovative dishes are accompanied by low-intervention and natural wines. The Michelberger concept is based on organic, biodynamic and sustainable products, which are sourced from the restaurant's own farm in the Spreewald and creatively processed.

Natural wine deluxe at Café Frieda. Café Frieda in Helmholtzkiez opened its doors in 2021 as the little sister of Mrs. Robinson and has been a firm favorite for exciting natural wines ever since. Frieda focuses on biodynamic and low-intervention wines from near - such as Germany, Austria, France - and far - from Georgia or Portugal. Natural wine is always served by the glass at Frieda, whether for brunch with a hand-rolled croissant, a little later with an aperitif and homemade sourdough bread on the terrace, and even more so for dinner in an elegant evening atmosphere with dry-aged duck or Seabrass Crudo.

Wine Damager: natural wines with rapper Tony D. A stone's throw from Rosenthaler Platz, this place serves really good natural wine. Behind the counter: Tony D, former rapper and co-founder of Aggro Berlin. In addition to beats and rap music, Tony is also a fan of natural wine, which he sells in his store in Berlin Mitte. His carefully chosen selection includes small natural wine producers as well as evergreens of biodynamic viticulture from Germany through to great classics from Bordeaux and Burgundy.

Natural wines and Woodfire Quisine in the ITA Bistro. The ITA Bistro on Lettestraße in Prenzlberg's Helmholtz Kiez is a new woodfire kitchen concept. The food is cooked exclusively in a stone oven, in which seasonal products are conjured up into modern dishes. The carefully curated range of natural wines at ITA is still small but fine. From rare and selected drops of different natural wines, mainly from France and Italy, the ITA Bistro pours a modern natural wine style into the glass and delights with smoky snacks, homemade bread and crispy salads.

Rare natural wines at Ernst. Ernst is located in the heart of the vibrant metropolis of Berlin in the Wedding district and is now known far beyond the city limits. Seasonal, Japanese-inspired fusion cuisine is celebrated here. Guests can look forward to 30 to 40 courses of freestyle plates created from the highest quality regional ingredients. The creativity also extends to the wine selection: Since summer 2023, Nacho Diaz, the sommelier in charge at Ernst, has demonstrated a stylish knack for selecting natural wines. The wine list offers an intellectual selection of top wines, from new-school vintners to rare natural wines.

--- FROM https://matadornetwork.com/read/best-wine-bars-berlin/ ---

Jaja
Photo: JAJA/Facebook
Jaja, in the Neukölln district of south Berlin, cements natural wine’s prowess as a solid accompaniment to a wide range of foods. Its inventive, seasonal menu rotates weekly and features locally sourced products. During warmer months, you can sit at one of the picnic tables outside for prime Neukölln people watching and grab wine by the bottle or by the glass. The wine menu has a strong French focus but stocks wines from across the growing regions of Europe, with the added bonus of serving as a sort of boutique wine shop. You can actually order bottles directly from the establishment and have them shipped to you via UPS. So, if that bottle of Hautes Côtes de Beaune from Maison en Belles Lies paired perfectly with the beef tartare, you can attempt a riff at home and at least know you got the wine part right.
Where: Weichselstraße 7, Neukӧlln
Viniculture
Viniculture has helped to champion natural wine in Berlin on the city’s west side. Although it’s one of the only places to get natural wine in what was the former west of Berlin, it also happens to import and provide rare low-intervention wines from all over the world with a particular focus on Austria, Germany, Italy, and France. There are weekly tastings and a friendly staff who will listen and help guide you to the wine of your dreams. You can also sit at one of the cozy tables out front and enjoy your bottle while people watching. Much like you’re at a vineyard tasting room, Viniculture started a wine club, aptly named Vinibox, that ships subscribers three bottles of wine every three months, curated by a different staffer each time. So the server might pick the wines one quarter and the wine buyer the next, accompanied by the same tasting notes and love stories that you get in their shop. Who said hipsters aren’t innovative?
Where: Grolmanstraße 44-45, 10623 Charlottenburg
Rocket Wine
Pay a visit to Berlin and you’ll somehow, someway, end up in the center of the city in a neighborhood called Mitte. No matter what it is that brings you in, stop by Rocket Wine. As the producers of Berlin’s homegrown natural wine fair Wine Rush, Rocket Wine oozes cool but with enough down-to-earth advice that you’ll actually feel welcome in its space. Enjoy wine by the glass at one of Rocket Wine’s sidewalk tables or grab a bottle to go. If, however, you’re feeling social, check its website and get tickets to one of its tastings, which feature a rotating list of natural winemakers and themes such as “bubbly night.” In addition to being educational and the perfect way to justify your craving for fermented grapes as a cool and productive hobby, these tastings tend to turn into wine-fueled social events. In them you have both a great way to meet people and a pregame for a night on the town.
Where: Linienstraße 114, 10115, Mitte
Naturales Winebar
Naturales Winebar is the perfect blend of Berlin grittiness and Spanish charm. It’s no-frills in the best possible way — pull up a seat at the long bar that snakes down a dimly lit interior. If you use reading glasses, bring them because you don’t want to be that person shining your cellphone light on the menu. It specializes in Spanish wines and tapas. Once the perfect pour is in front of you, relax outside with a grilled baguette and cheese.
Where: Friedelstraße 30, 12047, Neukӧlln
Ottorink
Located in the heart of Kottbusser Tor, Ottorink’s versatility means you can stop by on your way to a night out on Oranienburger Strasse, or you can spend a leisurely evening working your way through its stellar wine list. While not every wine on the list is low-intervention, there’s enough to keep natural wine enthusiasts intrigued, making it a great option for crowds mixed with low-fi converts and traditional wine drinkers.
Where: Dresdener Str. 124, 10999, Kreuzberg

--- FROM https://www.raisin.digital/en/europe/countries/germany/berlin/berlin/ ---

Cantine Sant’ Ambroeus, run solely by charming owner Marco Callegaro. His vast Italian wine knowledge combined with his small, yet homely Italian shop & bar is home to Cantina Giardino, Radikon, Lino Maga and more classics, which in our opinion should be sipped accompanied by Marco’s wonderful Panino sandwiches. This place feels wonderfully Italian, like a rustic Enoteca you would find in Bologna or Milan.

The excellent and deservedly popular Rocket Wine in Mitte has recently upgraded to a larger, new location to become a bar as well as a shop - bridging the two in perfect harmony. At Rocket Wine you can enjoy a great range of european wines including Jean-Pierre Robinot, Costadilla and Koppitsch whilst nibbling on quality bread and cheese, as well as occasional more sophisticated food takeovers from local chefs.

Over in neighbouring Kreuzberg, notable spots to visit include perhaps Berlin’s prettiest restaurant & winebar, ORA. This historic space used to be a wooden Apothecary, and is still adorned with the cupboards and shelving. Candlelit dinners amongst green leather seating and intimate side rooms make this a truly beautiful experience, and the wine list is similar to Michelberger, who also own it - refined wines with a sense of place. Seasonal produce is cooked well by the passionate team and service is some of the best in town.

Perhaps one of our personal favourite wine joints in Berlin, is the wonderful St Bart. Located in the Gräfekiez of Kreuzberg, this gastrobar originally inspired by casual London eatery St John offers simple bistro fare with a British influence, great outdoor seating and a bar feel inside too. Expect food to be served ideal for drinking with, such as Scotch Eggs, Oxtail Pies, Fish & Chips, Brick Chicken with Capers, Onglet Steak with Chummichurri or Bacon Sandwiches - all made in house with a lot of love. Whilst the original owner very recently sold St Bart on, at the time of writing the high standards and good vibes remain, and this is a strongly recommended place to eat and drink for all, with a decent wine list too by Front of House manager Danny. Watch a video of the place here and do not miss their British-style Sunday Roast for serious feasting…

Vegetarians in search of upscale dining should head to Michelin starred restaurant Cookies Cream (hidden in perhaps the most Berlin-esque location ever!) where vibrant Somm Camille Darroux pairs wines excellently with their innovative plant-based dishes. There is much praise around Sri Lanken vegetarian restaurant Sathutu too, which also features a big love for natural wine.

Lesser visited areas like Wedding, Schöneberg and Charlottenburg leave much to be desired in the way of natural wines, however, for those willing to travel a little outside of the usual districts there is certainly a buzz about new opening Julius in Wedding, the sister hangout of Michelin starred 8 seater restaurant Ernst.

In Friedrichshain, whilst there is hardly anything else noteworthy in the area, the immensely popular and hip Michelberger Hotel features an excellent wine list of all styles, previously formed by Sommelier Emily Harmann, and now well updated by her predecessor Josh Fine. Here a vibrant courtyard with a cosy firepit makes for a very unique place to share a bottle, whilst inside the hotel lobby feels anything but what you expect from a hotel lobby to be, and drinking continues until the early hours on their sofas, as DJs keep the atmosphere going. For those looking for something slightly romantic, a dinner at Briefmarken Weine set in an old Post Stamp shop may be now somewhat pricey but an excellent vibe none-the-less.

In Prenzlauer Berg, there have been some excellent additions recently for natural wine lovers. Bar Normal, under now the wine management of knowledgeable & welcoming Alexander Kanastab, features both glouglou bangers, refined gastronomic sips and some rarer unicorn bottles sure to impress. Nearby mini-restaurant Otto has been a buzz of the city for some time now, and the owner has also just started a new joint venture focusing on traditional-meets-modern German cuisine, Trio, over in nearby Mitte. Casual sharing plates at affordable prices can be enjoyed at neighbourhood joint Estelle (of which their pizzas to share are a must-try).

Cafe Frieda, from the owners of more upscale Mrs Robinsons (where unicorns can also be found), is of notable distinction - armed with excellent sharing plates, hospitality and an all-day hangouind elsewhere in Berlin. We are constantly amazed how they can make a Baked Camembert actually incredible by dry aging the cheese, stuffing it with Beetroot jam and serving with a freshly baked to order, homemade fermented potato roll. Simple and impressive.

Of course, JaJa in Neukölln is perhaps one of the most famous wine bars in the city and since it was sold by the original owners, it's fair to say most prefer the charming new team, who have upped the bar’s food game and somehow stocked the cellar with even more rare gems than before. Whilst JaJa has the hip factor, meaning they feel fully booked with travellers keen to get some cool Instagram kudos drinking natural wines by the glass, make no mistake - the wine list here is 100% excellent and wine nerds will be impressed. Expect to nudge shoulders with the city’s Somms later in the evening and if you’re in luck, some tasty bottles being shared amongst natural wine fanatics table to table, depending on guests that night of course.

Close to the lovely canal bursting with young Berliners in summer, is the bisto Sorrel, which for sure deserves its own visit for their well-sourced range of tasty bottles and scrumptious food for brunch and dinner, of which some claim has the best Schnitzel in Berlin..

However, the most exciting addition to Berlin as a spot to go mainly for drinking  (with food being secondary) is Bar Sway. Whilst many head to Bar Sway for the vibe created by DJ owner Jamie Tiller and the affordable wide choice of naturals by the glass, take note that some of the wines dotting the walls here really catch the eye, at very fair prices too. Wine nerds can enjoy sipping Gabrio Bini, Julie Balagny, Robinot, Tschida and many more bangers whilst nibbling on actual bar food - simple Saucisson with pistachios on the side, Grilled cheese in Brioche served with a pickle, Sardines on toast…and even casual packets of crisps! This is exactly the sort of wine bar Berlin was missing - and a must-visit for those not afraid of a loud vibe to enjoy on a night out.

On a similar level, Lager Lager not too far away may sound seemingly exclusive to beer, however, this is a decent neighbourhood bar to enjoy natural wines at good prices too. And shout out to Le Balto too, who like Lager Lager and Bar Sway, are more drink focused than food - although take note their Jewish style bar snacks work a real treat with their ma